---
title: "A Not-so-express Route to Marrakesh: The May 2025 Lupine Race"
description: ""
countries:
  - GB
  - FR
  - CH
  - AD
  - ES
  - MA
pubDate: 2025-05-24
heroImage: ../../img/marrakech-sunset.jpg
---

import Figure from "../../components/Figure.astro";
import Gallery from "../../components/Gallery.astro";

It's 9:44 on a sunny Sunday morning in May in Lyon, France. I'm basking in the
sun after having an excellent croissant for breakfast when I suddenly receive a
text on my phone that makes me curse audibly in public: the train I was waiting
to catch in less than half an hour has been delayed by 20 minutes. Without
figuring out all the details, I immediately know that that is going to destroy
all the work that I've been doing for the past 24 hours.

How did I end up in this position? Well, after participating in last year's
[Lupine Race to Albania](/lupine-race-2024/) and having so much fun, I signed up
as soon as possible for the following edition, which was called "The Marrakesh
Express". This edition will cover the 2,300 km between London and Marrakesh from
May 17th to 24th, 2025.

I was really excited about this edition of the race, as it would pass through my
native region of Andalusia in southern Spain, and Marrakesh is one of my
all-time favourite destinations, having visited multiple times.

In case you don't know, the [Lupine Race](https://lupine.co.uk/race/) is a
public transport race, organised by the folks at
[Lupine Travel](https://lupinetravel.co.uk/). Trains, buses, and ferries are
allowed. Taxis are only permissible within city limits, and you can't catch a
plane, helicopter or hot-air balloon. Whilst you know the start and end
locations, there are a series of checkpoints that you need to clear along the
way. The location of these is only revealed at the start of the race, so you
can't plan in advance. The exception is the first stop in continental Europe,
which is always announced beforehand, as getting a last-minute train over the
English Channel would be prohibitively expensive or outright impossible
otherwise. For this race, we know that the first checkpoint will be situated in
Paris.

This adventure begins with me heading to the Herne Hill Velodrome in South
London, accompanied once again by my ever-supportive wife, Cris. We arrive at
Brixton station, on the Victoria Line, which is not the closest station to the
Velodrome, but is the nearest one within the area of coverage of the TfL cycle
hire scheme, also known as Boris Bikes.

You see, in previous editions, the race started from Trafalgar Square, which
made it trivial to get to St Pancras station, where the Eurostar departs: a
quick hop on the Piccadilly line of the Tube and you arrive there in under 20
minutes without breaking a sweat. This time, however, the start has moved to the
aforementioned Herne Hill Velodrome, an iconic venue that hosted the cycling
events of the 1948 London Olympics.

The first challenge we racers are facing is getting from there across London to
St. Pancras to catch the Eurostar. The race starts at 10:30 sharp, and the first
train to Paris departs at 11:31. A lot of participants will probably have
decided to take the following train at 12:31, but when competing for the fastest
arrival, a difference of one hour could be irrelevant, or could cascade and
compound into an ever bigger delay.

Getting on that first train is going to be tough, and the most straightforward
option is getting a Thameslink train direct to St Pancras at 10:42 from the
nearby Herne Hill Station. There are two problems with that option, though:
first, the station is 1.3 km away from the start line, so getting there quickly
enough to catch that train would mean having to run a little bit, and I know
from the last race that the opportunities to get a shower during the event are
pretty slim, so sweating that early into it is not appealing at all. Second,
British trains can be unreliable at the best of times, and I definitely don't
want to get stuck there and miss the Eurostar.

With all of that in mind, I came up with a different plan: to rent an electric
bike from the closest docking station, carry it with me to the Velodrome, and
use it to get back to Brixton. On the one hand, that means not having internet
access for the half an hour or so that it will take me to get there. On the
other hand, Victoria line trains are fast and frequent, and I could even get to
the Eurostar boarding area a couple of minutes earlier than if I were to take
the Thameslink train.

We arrive, bike in hand, at the Velodrome a little bit after the advertised
opening time of 9:00 AM. I go to check in and collect my race pack (which we are
strictly prohibited from opening before the race starts), GPS tracker, and swag,
and say hello to the organising team and other racers I met during last year's
edition. It's soon time to line up at the starting line and listen to the
checkpoint reveal.

## The Checkpoints

Over the speaker, Race Director James Finnerty introduces the event and
announces the checkpoints we will need to hit. The first one we already knew:

- **Paris**, where racers will have to clear two checkpoints, depending on which
  route they choose.

Then comes a surprise: in previous editions of the race, checkpoints were
independent of each other, and competitors were able to choose freely whenever
there was more than one option. For the first half of this race, however, we're
forced to choose among three fixed routes:

- **The Pilgrim's Picnic**, which emulates the Camino de Santiago and passes
  through:
  - **Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port**, just north of the Pyrenees in the French Basque
    Country.
  - **Santiago de Compostela**, the destination of the Camino

- **The Mountain Goat**, an alpine itinerary with stops in:
  - **Chamonix**, the base for the ascent of Mont Blanc
  - **Andorra La Vella**, the capital of the microstate in the middle of the
    Pyrenees

- **The Island Hopper**, a ferry-heavy option including:
  - **Toulon**, in the Côte d'Azur
  - **Palma de Mallorca**, the capital of the Balearic Islands.

From there, all routes converge into a single itinerary:

- **Valencia**, on the eastern coast of Spain
- **Tangiers**, the Moroccan port where we'll enter Africa
- **Marrakesh**, where racers must clear a final checkpoint before heading to
  the finish line

<Figure
  img="lupine-race-2025-marrakesh-map.jpg"
  caption="The route options"
  alt="Map depicting the route options for
the race"
/>

I don't register all the options, but I decide against opening the race pack
right now, as it'll be a hassle to get it out and back again into my backpack in
the minute or so before the race starts. I'll have time to check it on my way to
the Eurostar.

## Leg 1: London to Paris

The race starts as soon as the clock hits 10:30. I navigate through the crowd
with my bike and get on it as quickly as possible, easily overtaking everyone
else. I'm in the lead!! The bike ride goes smoothly, and I manage to get to a
Victoria line train in Brixton in just over 11 minutes.

The downside of this strategy is that the Victoria line doesn't have mobile
coverage yet, so for the 20 minutes I'm riding the Tube, I won't be able to
check itinerary options. Instead, I can open the race pack and start locating
where the checkpoints are on the map the old-fashioned way.

Using the European Rail Atlas, I locate the most obscure ones, Chamonix and
Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port, and find that both are part of the French railway
network, with Geneva and Bayonne being relatively close major cities. At this
point, of course, I don't need to worry too much about the second half of the
race, as all routes converge in Valencia.

I look at the options with the routes traced on the map, and I think I'm going
to take The Pilgrim's Picnic. Getting in and out of Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port
should be easy enough, given its proximity to Bayonne. The radial design of the
Spanish railway network is particularly challenging, making the fastest route to
Santiago likely to involve travelling south, possibly all the way to Madrid,
then returning north to backtrack and head to Valencia. However, there should be
plenty of connections available, and many of them likely involve high-speed
trains.

The problem with the Mountain Goat route, which is the most direct one, is that
it goes through Andorra. Getting to Chamonix, a major mountain resort town, and
one that is relatively close to Turin and Geneva, shouldn't be too hard. But I
already know that the only way to get to Andorra is by bus, either from Toulouse
or Barcelona, or from a nearby train station that is infrequently served by
night trains from Paris.

I don't really think much of the Island Hopper route. The Interrail map
indicates that the ferry from Barcelona to Palma takes approximately six and a
half hours, and that the ferry from Palma to Valencia takes around nine hours.
Surely the other two routes offer faster options to get to Valencia.

While I'm still considering this, the train arrives at King's Cross St Pancras,
and it's time to overtake the tourists heading for Platform 9¾. I arrive at the
Eurostar check-in 27 minutes after departing from Herne Hill, which is a
personal record. I breeze through security and passport control, and realise
that my train isn't even boarding yet.

Since I had booked a first-class seat at great expense, which allows me to check
in just 15 minutes before the train departs, instead of the usual 30, I decide
to make the most of it and access the first-class lounge, where I'll also have
better Wi-Fi.

I grab a Coke Zero and start checking the itineraries. The journey through
Santiago is actually very slow, as it seems I won't be able to make it to
Valencia until at least Monday at 11:30 AM. The reason for this is that there
don't seem to be any overnight connections out of Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port, which
means I would be able to get there tonight but would have to wait until past
9:30 AM on Sunday to return to Bayonne.

I start looking at the Mountain Goat route next. There is a TGV from Paris Gare
de Lyon to Geneva at 16:10 that seems quite attractive, as I'll arrive in Paris
at 14:53, so I should be able to board it after clearing the two checkpoints in
the French capital. It also means that anyone who is taking the next Eurostar to
avoid the rush to St Pancras won't be able to get it. Furthermore, the TGV
arrives in Geneva at 19:29, and I can take a bus to Chamonix from there at
20:05, arriving at 22:00, which is relatively fast considering the remote
location of Chamonix.

The problem, I know, is going to be getting from the Alps to the Pyrenees and
into Andorra, but before I can check how much of an issue that will be, I hear
the boarding call for my train. Not wanting to miss it, I finish my drink
quickly and go join the boarding queue. On the way out of the lounge, I spot
fellow racer Sam S. I'm tempted to say hi, but she looks really focused on her
screen, so I decide against it. I'm not totally happy to see her either: I knew
some more people were going to be able to catch the first Eurostar, but a boy
can hope…

Anyway, I make my way to the far end of St Pancras –I've booked the first seat
of the train, looking to get into Paris without anyone or anyone's luggage
holding me back, and board.

At least this year, I get mobile reception on the train, which wasn't the case
last year. Although coverage is patchy at best while still in England, it
improves once we're in the Channel and works perfectly fine once we're in
France. In any case, I return to reviewing my itinerary options. I was right in
thinking that getting through Andorra was going to be a pain. At first glance,
the fastest option appears to be going to Barcelona first and then heading back
up the Pyrenees, which doesn't seem ideal. However, this itinerary puts me in
Valencia at 4:42 AM on Monday morning, which is not bad at all.

I then look at the Island Hopper route quite sceptically. I prefer not to depend
on ferries, as their schedules can be unpredictable, to say the least. A quick
glance puts the arrival time into Palma de Mallorca at 6:00 on Monday morning,
and I stop looking there. Now, if instead of letting me get carried away by a
severe case of confirmation bias, I'd have spent a few minutes looking deeply
into the route, I could have noticed that there was a much faster route: going
quickly from Touloun to Barcelona, taking the ferry from Barcelona to the
northern port of Mallorca, Alcudia, and then crossing the island before hopping
in an overnight ferry from Palma to Valencia. That itinerary would put you in
Valencia at 8:00 AM on Monday, and relying on much less tight connections than
the Mountain Goat option, which, from my calculations, hinged on a 5-minute
connection in Narbonne.

I would not realise that the fastest route through Palma existed until it was
too late, with terrible consequences, as you might be anticipating. Looking
back, however, I think I would still have taken the high-risk, high-reward
option of going through Chamonix and Andorra.

Time flies, though, and I need to commit to my plan: clear the Paris checkpoints
and take the train to Geneva. Since this race was going to cross Spain, where
the Interrail pass is basically useless, and Morocco, which is not covered at
all by it, I have decided not to purchase one; therefore, I'll need to pay full
price for the tickets. The last-minute ticket price for the international TGV to
Geneva is so high, over €180, that it's actually cheaper to buy the SNCF
Advantage discount card, which costs €50. Since it's only €5 more to upgrade to
first class, I think I might as well do that.

Now I need to sort out my tickets for the Paris metro. I've heard that RATP, the
Île-de-France public transport agency, are finally getting rid of paper tickets.
Only now, as the train inches closer and closer to Paris, do I realize that I
have failed to plan for this properly: getting the info on how to pay for the
Paris metro is something that I should have cleared well before the start of the
race, as I'm now having to waste precious time figuring it out.

It turns out that instead of doing the sensible thing and allowing contactless
cards to be used for payment at the turnstiles, you have to buy tickets on your
phone via the Bonjour RATP app. I install the app, sign up, and attempt to
purchase tickets, only to discover that to do that, you need to install a second
app that just runs the background process to hold and activate the tickets.
After spending too much time setting up the bloody thing, running device
compatibility checks, and reciting the Marseillaise in reverse three times, I
finally manage to purchase three single tickets and get on with my day. By now,
though, Paris is getting really close.

## Leg 2: Paris to Chamonix

The Eurostar actually pulls into Gare du Nord 5 minutes early, at 14:48. As
planned, I'm the first of the passengers to step into the station. I'm familiar
enough with its layout to go straight to the Metro station, and I'm already
waiting for a Line 4 train at 14:51.

The rush is justified. Before leaving the French capital, we need to clear two
checkpoints:

- The first one is common to all racers, and we can choose between **Ladurée**
  in Rue Royale near the Madeleine church, or **VG Pâtisserie**, a vegan shop on
  Boulevard Voltaire.

- The second one depends on which of the three itineraries you've chosen. For
  the Mountain Goat route through Chamonix and Andorra, we're required to go up
  **Montmartre** to get acquainted with heights, and take a photo of **Le
  Passe-Muraille**, a sculpture of a man passing through a wall.

Now, nowhere on the race pack says that we need to hit them in that order, just
that we need to clear both checkpoints before getting out of Paris. If I had
realised that, I could have gone to Montmartre first, then to Ladurée, and then
to Gare de Lyon, doing a counter-clockwise tour through the Rive droite.

<Figure
  img="paris-checkpoints-nice-order.jpg"
  caption="What I could have done..."
  alt="Map of Paris showing a
straightforward itinerary from Gare du Nord to Gare de Lyon, passing first trough Montmartre and then trhough
Madeleine"
/>

Instead, I assumed that I had to go to Ladurée first. That means I have to head
south from the Gare du Nord to the pâtisserie, then go back up north to
Montmartre, before tracing a long diagonal to the southeast to get to Gare de
Lyon. I should still be able to make it, but I'll need to run.

<Figure
  img="paris-checkpoints-actual-order.jpg"
  caption="...what I actually did"
  alt="Map of Paris showing a convoluted
itinerary from Gare du Nord to Gare de Lyon, passing first trough Madeleine and then trhough Montmartre"
/>

After riding the Line 4 for four stops, I change at Strasbourg Saint-Denis, and
while waiting for the Line 8 train to arrive, I spot Sam S. again and we wave at
each other. After waiting for the train for five excruciating minutes, I don't
spot any other racers there. Since I think that we need to hit the checkpoints
in order, and Ladurée made way more sense than VG Pâtisserie for any of the
three routes (that's the first thing I checked back in St Pancras), I wonder for
a moment if this race's competition isn't going to be so fierce as the previous
one, before realising that there's no way that is going to be the case.

At 15:11, with just 59 minutes to the departure of my next train, I clear the
Ladurée checkpoint. I consider buying macarons for a millisecond before
realising how stupid an idea that would be. Sam S. was there with me, but when I
look back at her after a couple of seconds, she is metres ahead on the way to
the Concorde metro station. That's a wake-up call, and I decide to give her a
run for her money and sprint ahead like a madman. We both laugh audibly. That's
what's great about the Lupine Race: the competition is absolutely real and
fierce, but everyone takes it in good spirits.

I arrive at Place Concorde, trying to find the entrance to the metro station. I
wait to cross the street, and in that time, Sam S. catches up with me. I was
engrossed looking at the map, trying to see the entrance, and she takes the
lead, crossing the road. I start running again, but look back on the left and
spot a stone balustrade –that must be an entrance, and, in fact, it is. I
devilishly laugh at leaving Sam. S fending by herself, not knowing that she's
going to take an entirely different route, and I won't see her again until a few
days later.

I take the Line 12 train direct to Lamarck Caulaincourt, the closest station to
the Passe-Muraille sculpture. On the way there, I purchase my bus ticket from
Geneva to Chamonix. Located under the hill of Montmartre, the station is 25 m
deep. It features no escalators, only a lift and a spiral staircase. I'm pretty
lucky, though, as I manage to catch a lift about to depart while I was already
looking for the stairs.

Once on the ground, I make a mistake and go down the steep staircase in front of
the station. Fortunately, it only takes a few meters to realise my mistake and
turn back. Already strapped for time, I run uphill, dodging tourists and dash
through Montmartre, approaching the checkpoint. At the crossroads next to the
sculpture, I have a couple of seconds of doubt. There's another team of racers
there, and when they see me looking around and back at my phone, slightly
confused, one of them signs to me to go back on my tracks.

The fact that I'm trying to puzzle out how another team could beat me to
Montmartre by so much probably doesn't help with my confused expression, as,
once again, I didn't realise you could go there first before visiting one of the
pâtisseries.

I don't think the way they're pointing is correct, but I don't think twice about
it and follow their indication. A few metres later, I realised that there is no
way the checkpoint is in that direction, and I turn back again and head to the
crossroads, having figured out that the monument is just to the left of it.

I see the people in the other team laughing and pointing in the right direction
now. I'm flabbergasted at what just happened. That goes directly against the
rules of the race. However, I choose not to say anything because I think it
wasn't done in bad faith, and it didn't cause me too much trouble, although it
could: I need to cross to the other side of Paris to catch a train that leaves
in 36 minutes and has cost me a small fortune; missing one metro train could
result in missing it. I think they're probably first-timers who don't fully
comprehend the potentially devastating implications of those shenanigans and
have other things to worry about at the moment.

Being completely honest, thinking back about it as I write these lines, I'm
getting belated anger, as now I can fully realise the potential ramifications of
those shenanigans. If something like that happens in the future, I won't let it
slide.

Anyway, I quickly go in front of the Passe-Muraille sculpture and take the
customary selfie at 15:34, before sprinting back to the same Metro station I
came from. Luck seems to be on my side, and a train arrives almost as soon as I
get onto the platform, after breezing down the spiral staircase. The Line 12
train takes forever to go back to Madeleine, where I change to the modern Line
14, taking me all the way to Gare de Lyon, where I finally arrive at 15:57.

I make it all the way to my train with 8 minutes to spare. It's curious how your
mindset changes when doing this race. I'm usually the kind of person who wastes
too much time at airports, because I can't bring myself to arrive less than 2
hours before a flight. Now I'm getting to a train station less than 10 minutes
before departure, and it feels like plenty.

Anyway, I find my way to my seat, which I'm glad to have booked on the upper
deck. Not that there were many seats available, though: I had to get a seat at a
table of four, which is hell when you're travelling solo, as you're forced to
face a stranger and make sure to not invade their personal space accidentally.

I try to connect to the train Wi-Fi, which of course doesn't work, but
thankfully, I manage to get consistently good reception for almost the whole
trip. Time to polish my plan.

At this point, I'm fully committed to this route; there's no way to turn back
and choose any of the other options. I'm still fairly confident I've made the
right choice, though.

The first thing I need to do is figure out what the Chamonix checkpoint is. Last
year, the checkpoint locations were specified in the Race Pack down to the exact
coordinates (well, what3words location). This time around, they're hidden behind
easy-to-solve riddles. We're told to take a picture of the two separate statues
that honour the first climbers of Mont Blanc.

Upon some lightweight research on Wikipedia, I learn that these are Jacques
Balmat and Michel-Gabriel Paccard. Balmat's statue is very easy to locate, but
Paccard's, which turns out to be just 50 metres away, doesn't have a photo of
its own on the Google Maps entry. A quick inspection with Street View and a
couple of external sources confirms the location, though.

Once the spots are marked on the map, it's time to start refining my route. So
far, my itinerary puts me in Andorra at 20:00 tomorrow, which is good enough to
get me to Valencia at 4:30 AM on Monday morning. That's quite important, as I'm
aiming to take the first connection out of Valencia, at 6:57 AM. As long as I
can make that, I'm looking at a speedy arrival to Marrakesh on late Monday
evening or just past midnight.

The problem is that on Sunday, I'll have to make a few tight connections to get
to Barcelona, from where I'll backtrack to Andorra, before heading back to
Barcelona and then overnight to Valencia. That's quite a circuitous route.

I look at the buses in and out of Andorra. From Toulouse, there are only two
buses I could take: one at 13:45, that would put me in Andorra at 18:20 and be a
massive win, and another one at 17:45. The latest is more of a backup plan than
anything: it's scheduled to arrive to Andorra La Vella at 22:20, which would
derail all of my onward itinerary.

Many services depart from Barcelona, which is why my original itinerary includes
it. But as I mentioned above, that hinges on quite a few tight connections. It
would look like this:

1.  Getting to Lyon before 10:00 AM. That part is easy, since I have a couple of
    options that would give me plenty of time to spare.

2.  Taking the 10:10 AM TGV to Toulouse and getting off in Narbonne, where I'd
    have a 5-minute connection to a regional train to Perpignan. This doesn't
    make me too nervous, as the TGV is supposed to be the most dependable
    service to cross France, and the SNCF actually sells the connection as a
    single ticket.

3.  Arriving in Perpignan at 13:48, and from there taking either the 14:00
    BlaBlaCar Bus or the 14:05 Flixbus coaches to Barcelona, arriving at the
    North Bus station of the Catalan capital at around 16:30. The former departs
    from Marseille at 9:00, stopping in Nîmes, Montpellier, Perpignan, and
    Girona. The latter departs from Lyon at 7:30, making the same intermediate
    stops except for Girona, meaning that it runs direct from Perpignan to
    Barcelona. While this would be my preferred option, I know that bus
    timetables are unreliable to say the least, especially in a case like this
    when they have been running for hours before the stop where I would board.
    As long as either one is remotely within schedule, though, I should be fine.

4.  Crossing Barcelona in less than 45 minutes to take the bus to Andorra at
    17:15 from the Zona Universitària metro stop. This is a relatively short
    time window, which is why relying on buses to get to Barcelona makes me a
    bit uneasy.

Getting that bus to Andorra is essential, as it would leave me there at 20:00.
However, in practice, it would probably arrive earlier. From what I can see, the
timetables have a lot of built-in room for slack. Once in Andorra La Vella,
clearing the checkpoint should be a breeze, as the required proof is getting a
picture of the Andorran coat of arms, which should be pretty straightforward,
especially knowing that it is featured in the national flag.

The critical bit is that I need to catch the 20:15 bus from Andorra to
Barcelona. That would put me back there at 23:15, which leaves me enough time to
take the 23:59 or 01:00 overnight buses to Valencia. After that, the next
departure from Andorra to Barcelona isn't until 22:15, arriving too late to
catch any of those overnight buses, and making me wait until the 7:10 train,
which would be catastrophic.

After careful research, I fully understand all the nitty-gritty of the
itinerary, but I'm hopeful. It doesn't seem too far of a stretch to think that I
should be able to get to Toulouse in time for that 13:45 bus to Andorra,
considering that I'll arrive in Chamonaix at 22:00. I start to try to find a way
to do that, when I look out of the window and realise that we must be getting
close to Switzerland, as the scenery has changed quite a bit, from the
cultivated flats and rolling hills of the typical French countryside, to a more
alpine landscape. The sights are beautiful, and I try to take a mental break
from all the planning and concentrate on the landscape for a bit, but fail. Soon
enough, the train starts crossing a succession of tunnels, which leaves my phone
without reception and forces said mental break on me.

<Gallery
  imgs={[
    {
      src: "approaching-switzerland-landscape-1.jpg",
      alt:
        "A turquoise lake (Lac de Nantua) in front of a " +
        "forest-covered mountain",
    },
    {
      src: "approaching-switzerland-landscape-2.jpg",
      alt: "Forest-covered mountains near Geneva",
    },
    {
      src: "approaching-switzerland-landscape-4.jpg",
      alt: "Bigger mountains near Geneva",
    },
    {
      src: "approaching-switzerland-landscape-3.jpg",
      alt: "Another view of Lac de Nantua",
    },
  ]}
  caption="Gorgeous scenery crossing the Jura mountains"
/>

Before I have time to process everything, the train approaches Geneva on time.
I've taken a look at it, and since the coach station is next to the lake, and I
have over 30 minutes to change, I can go to the waterside and see the lake and
the infamous water jet. I'm looking forward to that, as I've never been here
before and the weather is extraordinary.

I get off the train and am surprised to have to go through customs, although it
makes sense. While Switzerland is part of Schengen, and therefore there are no
passport controls, it is not part of the EU or its Customs Union. Out of the
station, the first shops I see are a souvenir shop selling Swiss knives and a
chocolate shop. A little bit later, I pass by a luxury watch store and a private
banking office. Yup, I'm definitely in Switzerland.

In the 500-metre walk down to Lake Léman, I locate the coach stop, just to my
right. At some point, someone in the group chat asks a question about the Toulon
checkpoint, and I enter full panic mode. If someone is getting there fast, it
probably means they're competing for the win, and I might have missed something
big. Have I already lost the race on day one? I quickly check the schedules of
the overnight Touloun - Mallorca ferries. To my relief, they only happen on
Mondays and Wednesdays. The fact that I was totally oblivious to that is
foreshadowing. In any case, now it's time to relax for a couple of minutes with
the view of Geneva by the lake.

As I'm making my way back to the coach station, I see that someone is asking in
the group chat if there's someone in Geneva. I had supposed I had company, but
it will be interesting to see how many. I haven't seen Sam S. since Ladurée, and
that spooks me a little bit, since she was clearly competing intensely for the
win: what may I have missed that she knows?

Anyway, the person asking wasn't even in Geneva yet, just on their way there.
However, Dave, whom I met last year,
[catching an overnight bus in Slovenia](https://www.halfwaytogo.com/lupine-race-2024/#:~:text=I%20meet%20lovely,really%20really%20fast%3F),
replies to the message saying that he's here. Sure enough, five minutes later, I
met him on the first bus to Chamonix.

The coach station or _Gare Routière_ at Geneva is not what I expected at all:
the building was closed for repairs, so it basically amounted to a car park with
no information, where I had to check each bus individually to find mine. I had
expected the bus to depart exactly on time, given that it was run by a Swiss
company. Still, it actually departs one minute early, with only about 5 people
on board. It's 20:04, and we're expected to get to Chamonix at 22:00.

I have a chat with Dave, catching up on how the race is going so far, how much
I'd love to spend some proper time travelling around Switzerland and the plans
ahead of us. A French-speaking Swiss woman sitting behind us overhears us and
asks what we do. We explain the Lupine race to her and have a chat about it and
the area we're currently in. After she describes in great detail to us how
fantastic Switzerland is – good for her, I suppose - the conversation finally
dies, and I can get back to scheming.

Dave has told me that he plans to spend the night in Chamonix, and I also need
to decide what to do. The idea of sleeping in a bed, while nice, sounds
soul-crushing in a certain way: that's not what you're supposed to do during the
race.

As far as I can see, I have a few options to get out of Chamonix, all of which
get me to Lyon's central station before 10:10, in time for the dash to
Barcelona, but none that would allow me to get earlier to Andorra, which is my
fundamental objective. There's an option to take a bus at 6:00 AM, arriving in
Lyon at 9:50, only 20 minutes before my train, and not even at the same station.
That's too close for comfort, so I opt for the second option: taking a bus to
Paris at 00:20, stepping out at Dijon at 04:20, and then catching the first
train of the day to Lyon, arriving at the central station at 08:44.

I look up the window and the view is just magnificent. The sun is setting behind
the Alps, Mont-Blanc presiding from the background.

I just can't accept that I can't make it to Toulouse before the 13:15 bus from
there to Andorra. Come on, it's not that far away, right? _Right?_ I pull up
timetables, search for crazy combinations, and after an eternity, I finally spot
it: a way to get to Lyon at 07:22. It technically could put me in Toulouse at
13:13, but that's only two minutes to run out of the train station and catch the
bus. However, it enables me to get to Barcelona so much earlier, at 13:28, and
only relying on trains and not buses!

As far as I can see, this wouldn't make a massive difference in the time I'd
arrive in Marrakesh, as it would only translate to an earlier arrival in
Valencia at 02:15 AM. However, I'd still have to wait for the same first train
out of there in the morning. Gaining so much time is really worth it anyway, as
I'd eliminate my dependency on nail-biting connections.

The itinerary would be:

1. The first bus to Geneva at 03:20, arriving at 04:45

2. Train from Geneva at 05:14, arriving in Lyon at 7:22

3. From Lyon, take the TGV at 8:06, arriving in Barcelona Sants at 13:28, after
   a 14-minute connection in Valence.

I'm exhilarated, feeling so happy to have spotted this while my fellow racer
Dave is taking a power nap. I rush to book the tickets. First, the bus out of
Chamonix and into Geneva. Done. Second, the train from Geneva to Lyon… what do
you mean the first one doesn't depart until 7:14? Oh no, have I just mixed up AM
and PM? Is it sold out? What is going on?

I go back to check the timetable, and it clearly confirms that there is a train
from Geneva at 05:14, arriving in Lyon at 07:22. So I'm not crazy or made a
stupid mistake, then. Maybe it's just the French website, let's try booking it
from the Swiss one… And I still see the same thing. What's going on?? And that's
when I look back at the timetable and notice the small print: the service runs
every day. Except. Sundays.

My world falls apart, and I feel like a complete idiot. Anyway, I tell myself,
it's fine. It's just going to hinge on tight connections, but you're still in
the lead. Calm down, it'll be fine.

The time has passed quickly while I completed my perfect exercise in
self-frustration, and we arrive in Chamonix. Dave and I head out to find the two
monuments we need to photograph to clear the checkpoints. I'm curious about what
he's going to do if he's spending the night in Chamonix. Is he really going to
risk it with the 06:00 bus? I mean, I hope so. We're the only two racers
currently in the lead, although I know more are heading our way after taking the
next Eurostar and will be able to catch up with us overnight. Or maybe he's
taking the 03:20 bus to Geneva, and then the train from there, arriving in Lyon
at 09:22. That would make more sense, although getting a hotel room to wake up
before 03:00 seems rough.

In any case, we arrive at the town's main square at 22:14, where we take the
required selfies with both statues. Then Dave asks me if I want to have dinner
with him, to which I, of course, say yes, having not eaten anything all day. Few
places are still open by that time, so we end up settling for a burger stall.
Dave even buys me a beer, which feels great. During dinner, he convinces me to
get a hotel room, even if it's just for a few hours, and I start to see the
appeal of the option. I finally bit the bullet and book it.

After the restorative dinner, Dave and I part ways, and I set course for my
hotel, 5 minutes away. Tomorrow is going to be the decisive day that makes or
breaks my race, so I should rest up as much as I can.

<Figure
  img="chamonix-night.jpg"
  caption="View of Chamonix Mont-Blanc at Night"
/>

## Leg 3: Chamonix to Andorra

It's 23:00, and I'm walking up to my hotel when I pull up my phone to
double-check the address, and I realise that the booking hasn't gone through.
That makes me re-evaluate everything, and there and then I decide to take the
00:20 bus to Dijon. I have lost the appetite to spend north of a hundred euros
for less than 4 hours of sleep, and I'll arrive slightly earlier in Lyon, just
in case.

So after killing some time around lovely Chamonix, I get back to the bus stop.
Before my 00:20 bus to Dijon arrives, there's another one, the 23:50 to Rome.
I've actually looked into that one, to see if any of the intermediate stops
could get me any sooner into Andorra, with no luck. But it comes from Geneva,
and I know that some of the racers who took the second Eurostar and have opted
for the Mountain Goat route are coming in there.

Soon enough, the bus arrives, and I spot Alex L., with whom I ran for the win in
last year's race, getting off the bus. I greet him, and we exchange
pleasantries, but he (understandably) doesn't seem very pleased with seeing me
leaving when he's arriving. Not that there's much of a difference, though: the
limited transport options mean that anyone who's made it here now is in the same
position.

My bus arrives on time. I ask the Italian driver if there's a stop in Geneva
that maybe was not published in the timetables, but he confirms that there's
none. I have four hours to Dijon, so now would be a perfect time to get some
shuteye… but I don't. I try to put my insomnia to good use and see if I can spot
a new, faster route, but I don't have my heart on it. I know that I'm already on
the best possible itinerary, and my only hope is that there are no significant
hiccups. What I can do now is book tickets for the next few legs, which I do. I
get my tickets to Barcelona, Andorra, and Valencia. When I try to get my train
tickets from Valencia to Málaga via Madrid, I realise that Renfe's mobile app
puts the accepted card types logos on top of the CVC field, so you have to
fiddle until you manage to tap on one of the few free pixels… As if that wasn't
funny enough, once I manage to put in my card details and proceed, the system
entered maintenance mode. Ah, good old Renfe
[never fails to deliver](https://www.elmundotoday.com/2018/03/programar-bien-la-web-de-renfe-ya-es-el-sueno-del-90-de-los-espanoles/).

<Figure
  img="renfe-lol.jpg"
  alt="Screenshot of Renfe's mobile app showing a broken UI where it's almost
impossible to put card details"
  caption="UI design is my passion"
  width={400}
/>

At the scheduled time of 04:20, I arrive in Dijon. I have more than two hours
until my train, and nothing to do other than wander around the old town. I've
never seen even a photograph from Dijon before, only knowing because of the
mustard, so I'm delighted to discover that it is a lovely old city. The streets
are empty at this time of the morning, except for some scattered drunkards on
their way back home.

<Gallery
  imgs={[
    {
      src: "dijon-1.jpg",
      alt: "Palais des Ducs et des États de Bourgogne, Dijon",
    },
    { src: "dijon-2.jpg", alt: "A lovely house in Dijon" },
    { src: "dijon-3.jpg", alt: "Porte Guillaume, Dijon" },
    { src: "dijon-4.jpg", alt: "An alley in Dijon" },
    { src: "dijon-5.jpg", alt: "Old houses in Dijon" },
    { src: "dijon-6.jpg", alt: "Dijon Cathedral" },
  ]}
  caption="No crowds at this time of the day"
/>

After wandering through the city for a couple of hours, I arrive back at the
train station. I'm surprised to see that there are actually quite a few people
catching the first train of the day on a Sunday morning. I try to find any place
that would sell me coffee – even a damn machine, but to no avail. Thankfully,
the train departs promptly at the scheduled time of 6:43.

I now manage to buy the Renfe tickets for my train from Valencia to Malaga…
Success! I try to catch some sleep, but the rising sun isn't helping, and I
manage to get only about 20 minutes before arriving in Lyon at 08:45.

Now my mission is to find breakfast before my 10:10 train. Being in France, I
want to get a nice croissant, but most of the bakeries close on Sundays. After a
bit of research, I manage to find one open inside the market, and I promptly get
a croissant and a pain au chocolat. Oh, they are so good. The French really know
what they're doing.

<Gallery
  imgs={[
    { src: "viennoiserie-lyon-2.jpg", alt: "A croissant" },
    { src: "viennoiserie-lyon-1.jpg", alt: "A pain au chocolat" },
  ]}
  caption="That hits the spot"
/>

I now have the best part of an hour to bask a little bit in the sun, and I'm
doing just that when at 09:44 I get that text message. And just like that, with
that 20-minute delay, all those plans collapse like a house of cards. There's no
chance the train will make up enough time to make my connection in Narbonne.

So… what now? I know there's no better option than to take that same train to
its final destination, Toulouse, and go from there to Andorra, but that means
abandoning any hopes of going overnight to Valencia. I go check the departure
boards, in the off-chance that I've missed any other train that could get me
there sooner.

I find Dave looking at the screens, and joining him is also Andrew M., who
arrived in Chamonix on the same bus as Alex L. last night, although I didn't see
him get off the bus. We catch up on the developments, and Dave tells me that he,
in fact, got the 3:26 bus with Alex, who appears to have decided on the spot to
compete in the points (or most countries visited) category rather than for the
fastest finish, and has gone East.

Seeing as there are no other options, I get my ticket for the Narbonne to
Toulouse leg of the train and wait for the delayed departure. The train ends up
leaving over 20 minutes late, and I settle down for another long journey in a
table seat. Just my luck.

I'll go through the five stages of grief during the day, but not necessarily in
order. Denial went off quickly in Lyon while I processed the ramifications of
the delay. I knew the plan was tight and risky; however, I was mainly concerned
about delayed buses. The TGV should have been a reliable part. It was also the
first part of the itinerary, which makes the whole thing even worse.

Anyway, it's time to enter the bargaining stage and see if I can still arrive
relatively early in Valencia. As things stand right now, this seemingly
inoffensive 20-minute delay is going to make me arrive at the finish line
exactly 12 hours later than I originally planned. My itinerary to Valencia looks
like this at the moment:

- This train, arriving in Toulouse at approximately 14:35, after accounting for
  the delay
- The 17:45 bus from Toulouse to Andorra la Vella, arriving at 21:45
- The 22:15 bus from Andorra la Vella to Barcelona, arriving at 01:15
- The first train in the morning to Valencia, departing at 07:15, and arriving
  at 10:10

After the travel research equivalent of banging my head against a wall for a
solid couple of hours, I find nothing. Nothing except one thing, something quite
bizarre. I can see that there is a Flixbus service coming from France that stops
in Barcelona at 2:15 AM and arrives in Valencia at 6:30 AM. While this isn't as
good as my original plan, it is still much better than arriving after 10 AM. The
only problem is that I'm unable to book it. The Flixbus site allows you to buy
tickets from any of the stops in France, but not from anywhere in Spain.

As much as I research, and I do research, looking for crazy alternatives from
every stop I'll hit along the way, there isn't any other alternative. I have a
little scare when the train stops in Valence, as I look out of the window and
see a Renfe train. For a second, it seems that I might be able to jump off this
train and get on my way to Barcelona, but I soon realise that said train is
going the opposite way, back to Lyon.

After a gruelling journey where I don't catch much sleep, we finally arrive in
Toulouse. I reunite with Dav and Andrew, and we all head to the bus station to
confirm that the 17:45 bus to Andorra exists and is scheduled.

We have three hours to kill in Toulouse, and at least the weather is lovely, so
we find a place with outdoor seating to have a nice lunch and drown our sorrows
with some French wine. A little less wine than we paid for, by the way, as the
waiter acting as self-appointed sommelier insists on trying the bottle as well
to double-check if it's corked or something, only to pour a whole serving and
then, not so subtly, bring the glass to one of his mates on another table.
Cheeky little bastard. We all desist from arguing because we're all low on
energy and have other things to focus on.

Over lunch, where I try frog legs for the first time in my life (they really do
taste just like chicken), we discuss the situation we find ourselves in. I make
a pact with them: I reveal the existence of the 'ghost' unbookable bus from
Barcelona, in exchange, they need to share with me a way to book it if they find
one.

What about the people going through Mallorca? Well, I soon realise that I was
very wrong in dismissing that route out of hand. They appear to just have left
the port of Barcelona, on a ferry on the way to Alcudia, on the north end of the
island. We quickly check their options, and the picture doesn't look good for
us. They can cross the island to Palma in the South, clear the checkpoint there,
and be on their way to Valencia on an overnight ferry. Unless there are any
hiccups, they will arrive in Valencia two hours ahead of us, which doesn't seem
like much, but it really is, as it will allow them to fly past Spain while we
are going to be stuck in 2-hour long service gaps along the way.

Our chances of winning are slim. There are only two paths to victory for us:
either one of their ferries gets significantly delayed (which is not
unreasonable to think), or we manage to find a way to book that bus from
Barcelona to Valencia. Those are not very good odds, and I enter the depression
stage of my grieving journey.

We arrive early at the bus station –there's no chance we'll miss our bus to
Andorra. Soon, Ben P., whom I had also met during last year's race, appears and
joins our group. Our transport, a mini-bus (emphasis on mini), arrives promptly,
and we depart on time.

After a brief stop at the Toulouse-Blagnac Airport, where I have the chance to
spot an Airbus Beluga XL, we're on our way to Andorra. I try any option I can
find to book the 'ghost' bus. Every possible reseller. Every bus comparison
website. Every Spanish travel agency. Nothing.

I try to call FlixBus Spain, but their customer service only works on weekdays.
I try with the main English support line, and after listening for an ungodly
amount of time to some horrible holding music, I finally manage to speak with a
FlixBus rep. I explain the situation, provide all the details, but the answer
that I get is the one I anticipated: computer says no.

I manage to nod off for a while, and when I wake up, the bus is slowly starting
to climb the Pyrenees. The views are spectacular. It's a shame that I'm too
rushed and tired to take them in properly.

<Gallery
  imgs={[
    { src: "pyrenees-1.jpg", alt: "Landscape in the Pyrenees" },
    { src: "pyrenees-2.jpg", alt: "Landscape in the Pyrenees" },
    { src: "pyrenees-3.jpg", alt: "Landscape in the Pyrenees" },
  ]}
  caption=""
/>

As the bus enters Andorra La Vella, I'm firmly in the anger stage of the
grieving process (I said I wasn't going through the steps in order), and when
the bus arrives, I need to be alone and split off from the group. As I
anticipated, the task for the Andorra checkpoint is quite straightforward: we're
supposed to take a photo with a depiction of the Principality's Coat of Arms. As
soon as I step off the bus, I find the first one on its number plate. I'll
collect a few more as I walk through the steep streets of the capital's old
quarter.

<Gallery
  imgs={[
    {
      src: "andorra-2.jpg",
      alt: "View of the Romanesque Church of St Esteve of Andorra",
    },
    { src: "andorra-3.jpg", alt: "Streets of Andorra La Vella" },
    { src: "andorra-1.jpg", alt: "View over Andorra La Vella" },
  ]}
  caption=""
/>

## Leg 4: Andorra to Valencia

I get back to the bus station at 22:00, where I meet Andrew and Dave again.
Soon, we get more bad news.

<Figure
  img="andorra-delay.jpg"
  caption="Oh no..."
  alt="Photo of a departure board showing that the 22:15 is delayed
by 25 minutes"
/>

Time passes and there's no sign of the bus driver. After almost 50 minutes after
the scheduled departure, he finally arrives, and we board. I fall asleep almost
as soon as the bus starts going, only to be woken up at the border. Two Spanish
policemen board to check passports and customs, which takes quite a bit longer
than I expected.

The next time I wake up, we're already in Barcelona. We arrive at Sants Station
at 1:53 in the morning. The 'ghost' bus is scheduled to arrive between 2:10 and
2:15. In anticipation, I have bought tickets on that bus from Perpignan to
Valencia. FlixBus' policy states that you're not allowed to board a bus at a
stop later than the one you booked, but one has to try.

As the native Spanish speaker in the group, I prepare myself to plead with the
driver, perhaps improvising some sob story. I open the FlixBus tracker to see
how far away the bus is, and to my delight, it is already quite near us, just
five minutes away. Except… wait a second. It's actually five minutes past us. If
I weren't so tired, I'd have an emotional response to this.

Well, that's it then. The overnight ferry from Palma has departed on time with
our rivals presumably on board. So, unless there are any major surprises, we
have lost, still more than 1,400 km away from the finish point.

I leave my travel and sorrow companions at the bizarrely Star-Wars-themed hotel
annex to the train station, now needing to sort out my own accommodation for the
night. I haven't booked anything as I still had a little bit of hope.

The first train to Valencia departs at 7:15. I check the prices of nearby hotels
and hostels, but they're through the roof. Unwilling to waste more money (thank
good I at least got refundable tickets for the expensive Valencia - Madrid -
Málaga leg), I resign myself to mindlessly wandering the streets of the Catalan
capital. At least I have
[a very topical song](https://open.spotify.com/track/6uoNGWtkEiVSEx11sbRTXh?si=4e588ccc2d394aee)
to keep me company.

<Figure
  img="barcelona-bad.jpg"
  caption="3:11 AM. Not my finest hour."
  alt="Selfie in Barcelona"
/>

I book the train tickets to get to Valencia tomorrow, and then from Valencia to
Málaga. While I could also go to Algeciras (the port where the ferry to Tangier
departs from) via my hometown of Seville, and still take the same ferry, the
connection through Málaga is more reliable, as there are way more buses to
Algeciras departing from there.

Time does go slowly, but at some point past 5 AM, I make my way back to the
station, which is now open. The layout of Barcelona Sants is a terrible maze,
caused by the stupid boarding procedures of Spanish long-distance trains. Unlike
in most countries, where you can simply walk into the station and go to your
platform, you must arrive with plenty of time, wait for your platform to be
announced, pass through airport-style security, and then queue to enter the
platform only when directed by the staff.

As a result, the station has been made into a cumbersome labyrinth to separate
different areas. There's also not much seating (why would you need that in a
major transport hub anyway?), but I manage to find some and collapse down into
it. To add insult to injury, the toilets (which of course are not free) do not
even open until at least an hour after the station does.

When the time finally comes to board the train, I discover to my horror that I'm
seated in the only row of facing seats of the coach. A few moments later, my
seat companions arrive,
[a sales team of three talking shop quite loudly](https://youtu.be/NOK5l8TsN7Y).
Not that it matters too much, I am battered, and I fall asleep quite quickly. I
sleep for two hours straight. I wake up as the train stops in Castellón, and to
my horror, I realise that I have been drooling quite a bit, so much that there's
a visible puddle on my t-shirt. I've given those sales reps a good spectacle.
Anyway, since there are no more stops until Valencia, I get up and manage to
find an empty row of seats where I can stretch my legs. A school trip gets in
the way of any further sleep, but it's still a good trade-off.

The train pulls into Valencia Nord station just a few minutes late, and I set
out to clear the checkpoint. Before leaving, I spend a couple of minutes
admiring the impressive modernist architecture of the station building.
Valencia's central station, Joaquín Sorolla, is nothing more than a glorified
bus shelter, but Nord is a charming building.

<Gallery
  imgs={[
    { src: "valencia-nord-3.jpg", alt: "Façade of Valencia Nord Station" },
    {
      src: "valencia-nord-2.jpg",
      alt: "Ceiling and ornamentation of Valencia Nord Station",
    },
    {
      src: "valencia-nord-1.jpg",
      alt: "Ceiling and ornamentation of Valencia Nord Station",
    },
  ]}
/>

It's a 20-minute walk through the beautiful streets of Valencia's city centre to
the checkpoint spot, La Casa de Los Gatos –a miniature house for stray cats
built by the neighbours. I get there by 10:45. The leading pack, who arrived in
Valencia without a hiccup, were here only 2 hours before me. However, due to
train schedules, while they are well on their way to Madrid (again, a
consequence of the Spanish Railway Network's design, which requires a stop in
Madrid to reach pretty much any destination), I still need to wait here for
almost two hours.

<Figure
  img="la-casa-de-los-gatos.jpg"
  caption="That's quite cute"
  alt="La Casa de Los Gatos in Valencia"
/>

## Leg 5: Valencia to Tangiers

I haven't seen David or Andrew since Barcelona, but I know that they can't be
too far. Anyway, it's time for me to prepare for the rest of the journey. I make
my way to Valencia Joaquín Sorolla station, and set up shop in a nearby café. I
order a coke zero and bring out my laptop, ready to confirm, once again, that
there's no faster way for me to get onto African soil than the one I've already
chosen.

It's a bit frustrating to be frank. _If_ I had been able to arrive to Valencia
less than hour earlier, I could have been on my way to Valencia almost three
hours earlier. In the same way, _if_ I could arrive in Malaga just 25 minutes
earlier, I could connect to Algeciras immediately and have a small chance of
making it to Marrakesh tonight. And, of course, _if_ my grandma had wheels, she
would be a bicycle.

The online timetables weren't lying to me, and the station display confirms what
I knew: while buses to Algeciras depart throughout the day in 45-odd-minutes
intervals, I've arrived just at the beginning of a two and a half hours gap.
Well, that's not exactly true. There's a bus to Algeciras at 19:40, but because
it makes more stops on the way, it actually arrives 30 minutes later than the
20:00 service. At least I realized that when booking the tickets.

I book the first ferry I can, the 23:59 to Tangier Med from Algeciras. This is
another consequence of the delay: I won't make it to the Southern tip of Spain
in time to catch one of the daytime ferries from Tarifa, which are far superior
as they live you in the port of Tangier Proper. The port of Tangier Med is
located 50 km away from the city, and the only transport link between the two
are scammy taxis.

I will get in Morocco just past midnight (Morocco is on the same timezone as the
UK, so you gain one hour coming from Spain), well past any hopes of catching the
last southbound train. That's the big reason why I have tried relentlessly to
find a faster way to Tangier: if I had been able to get there before 23:00, I
would have had a chance to catch the 23:45 sleeper train to Marrakech, which
according to my calculations is the one that the leading pack are going to take,
as they will arrive in Tangier around 21:00. My original plans, had they not
been completely derailed, would have put me on the last high-speed connection
via Casablanca, departing from Tangier at 19:00.

Since I am positive that I will have to wait for the first train tomorrow,
departing at 6:00, and I refuse to spend another night rambling around a city, I
also book a hotel. I manage to find a reasonably priced room in the Ibis next to
the train station. I look forward to catching some proper sleep, but more
importantly, having a shower.

I finally make my way to the station. Now all the plans are set, and now there
is no way, barring a catastrophic hours-long delay that I'll have to change
them. Now I only have to go through the motions and make it to Tangier to fight
for the 7th spot, as I think there are six competitors in the leading pack. In
my group, I count, other than myself, other five racers: Dave, Andrew, Ben, and
team of two that I met this morning in Barcelona. So I'll still need to prepare
for a sprint finish if I at least want to make it into the top 10.

I board the train and have a perfectly pleasant and uneventful ride to Madrid.
Once I get there, though I'm going to have to rush: I arrive into Chamartin,
Madrid's northern terminus, but the trains to Malaga depart from Atocha, in the
southern end of the capital. I have 40 minutes to get there, which sounds like a
lot, but is actually a bit tight considering that you have to account for the
stupid security and boarding procedures of Spanish intercity trains, and that
Atocha is a terribly laid out station, spread out in a long rectangular shape,
so getting from one end to the other can take some time. Fortunately, highly
frequent commuter trains between the two should make the transfer relatively
easy.

I arrive in Chamartin on time, and getting out of the high-speed train and
changing to the commuter service to Atocha is a terrible experience. I have only
been here once before, 10 years ago, and I had forgotten how much this station
sucks. There is only one way to get out for all platforms, through a narrow
underpass that is completely crowded. Because the commuter line platforms at
Atocha are place behind turnstiles, I need to exit the station and enter again
–fortunately, at least I can use contactless to pay for the ticket.

There are only about six ticket gates to exit at Chamartin, and only one of them
is open for passengers coming from long-distance service who obviously don't
have a ticket for Madrid's commuter trains. It's utterly chaotic. I manage to
push way out and back in again, and I manage to find the platform for the next
train to Atocha, departing in two minutes, from the only departures board there
is: an old, fading tv placed in the middle of the underpass. Thankfully, I
manage to run and get to the train just in time.

The train is full of people, but I manage to find some standing room in one of
the last carriages. While I'm holding the handrail, I suddenly realize, to my
complete shame, that I stink. I mean, it's an unsurprising development,
considering that it's a Monday afternoon and the last shower I took was on
Saturday morning. Anyway, there's nothing I can do right now apart from trying
to keep my arms closed together.

I arrive in Atocha on a completely packed train, and I try to overtake as much
people as possible on the way out. I have to run the full lenght of the station
until I make it to the departures area for my connection to Malaga, but
fortunately there's no queue at security.

After, again, having to queue for boarding, I sit down and prepare to be taken
South, but first I make a visit to the train toilet to freshen up a bit, change
t-shirts, and put on a copious amount of deodorant. That seems to make a bit of
a difference, and as soon as the train leaves Madrid, I nod off.

I sleep for a good hour and a half, and soon enough I arrive in Malaga. It's
17:45, and after checking at the bus station that there really are no other
buses to Algeciras that I could catch before 20:00, I have two hours to kill
there. It's actually quite hot, so I go to the shady streets of the city center,
not without making a stop first to get a _bocadillo de jamón_.

<Figure img="malaga.jpg" caption="Sunny Málaga" />

In other circumstances, having some time to kill in Malaga would have been
lovely, but I just want to get to Africa. Finally, it's time to board my last
bus in Europe, which promptly depart at the scheduled time of 20:00. After a
pleasant ride with sunset views over the Strait of Gibraltar, I arrive in
Algeciras exactly at 22:00.

I make my way to the port immediately, and, before heading to the departures
area, I think that I might as well check the departure board in the ticket
office. Not to my surprise, I see that the 21:00 ferry is delayed and hasn't
departed yet. With nothing to lose, I ask the clerk if I can change my ticket to
board that one. He pulls out a walkie-talkie and asks his colleague on
departures if the boarding is closed yet. To my delight, it seems that I'm just
on time, and the clerk agrees to exchange the ticket on the condition that I run
to the ship, as they'll close boarding after me. I almost can't believe it, my
first stroke of luck in the race! It won't be enough to get to Tangier in time
for the overnight train to Marrakesh, but at least I'll be able to stay in my
hotel room for a couple more hours.

They weren't lying, and I see how they close the boarding gate with me, before
directing me and a couple other passengers that were waiting there to go to the
ship. It seems that there's someone else they need to get there, but whoever
they are, they are using the toilet at that moment. Not thinking too much of
that, I make my way to the ship, and, as I'm about to board, I look back just to
see Andrew walking a couple meters behind me.

After exchanging greetings and catching up on the race state, we join the queue
for passport control, which in these ferries is done aboard the ship, so you can
just get out when you arrive. I haven't really thought about it, but it's
actually quite weird that I haven't seen Andrew, Dave or Ben since the morning.
The other team of two actually came on the bus to Algeciras with me, but they
probably haven't realized that it was possible to get in this earlier ferry. Of
course, as long as they cross the Strait of Gibraltar tonight, it won't matter
too much.

While we were boarding the ferry, James, the Race Director, had sent an update:
the tracking wasn't updating properly for the leading pack while in Morocco, but
they were on their way to Marrakesh and expected to get there around 02:00. I
have a chat with Andrew about that, and we're both a bit puzzled: that time
doesn't seem to make any sense. The overnight train that they could take doesn't
arrive until 09:14, and the previous earlier train connection departed at 19:00.

After a while looking at departures and timetables, I realized what they're
doing: they're catching one of the latest high-speed trains to Casablanca at
21:00 or 22:00, arriving at around eleven or midnight. While there are no trains
to Marrakech at that time, there are buses well into the early morning. I think
the 2:00 estimate is a bit tight, but in any case they'll arrive there hours
before I can even leave Tangier.

## Leg 6: Tangiers to Marrakesh

I wake up at 5:00 ready to

## Epilogue: A Surprise to Be Sure, but a Welcome One

The next day, as I was having lunch, I got an unexpected text: 3 of the
competitors in the leading pack had been disqualified for failing to properly
complete a checkpoint. That bumped me from 8th to 5th place! Not the way I'd
have prefered to advance in the standings, but hey, I'll take it. A little bit
later, I discover that the disqualified team is actually the one that 'joked'
about giving me bad directions in Paris...

Well, as the song goes, karma is a relaxing thought.

<Figure img="trophy-marrakesh.jpg" alt="Me posing with the 5th place trophy" />
